In this lesson, we just want to get set up with the basics: tooling,
ability to compile, basic syntax, etc. Let's start off with the
tooling, you can keep reading while things download.

This post is part of a series based on [teaching Rust at FP
Complete](https://www.fpcomplete.com/rust). If you're reading this post outside
of the blog, you can find links to all posts in the series [at the top of the
introduction
post](https://www.snoyman.com/blog/2018/10/introducing-rust-crash-course). You
can also [subscribe to the RSS
feed](https://www.snoyman.com/feed/rust-crash-course).

## Tooling

Your gateway drug to Rust will be the `rustup` tool, which will
install and manage your Rust toolchains. I put that in the plural,
because it can manage both multiple versions of the Rust compiler, as
well as cross compilers for alternative targets. For now, we'll be
doing simple stuff.

* [Installation page on rust-lang.org](https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/install.html)
* [rustup.rs page](https://rustup.rs/)

Both of these pages will tell you to do the same thing:

* On Unix-like systems, run `curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh`
* Or run a Windows installer, probably the [64-bit installer](https://win.rustup.rs/x86_64)

Read the instructions on the rust-lang page about setting up your
`PATH` environment variable. For Unix-like systems, you'll need
`~/.cargo/bin` in your `PATH`.

Along with the `rustup` executable, you'll also get:

* `cargo`, the build tool for Rust
* `rustc`, the Rust compiler

## Hello, world!

Alright, this part's easy: `cargo new hello && cd hello && cargo run`.

We're _not_ learning all about Cargo right now, but to give you the
basics:

* `Cargo.toml` contains the metadata on your project, including
  dependencies. We won't be using dependencies quite yet, so the
  defaults will be fine.
* `Cargo.lock` is generated by `cargo` itself
* `src` contains your source files, for now just `src/main.rs`
* `target` contains generated files

We'll get to the source code itself in a bit, first a few more tooling
comments.

### Building with rustc

For something this simple, you don't need `cargo` to do the
building. Instead, you can just use: `rustc src/main.rs && ./main`.
If you feel like experimenting with code this way, go for it. But
typically, it's a better idea to create a scratch project with `cargo
new` and experiment in there. Entirely your decision.

### Running tests

We won't be adding any tests to our code yet, but you can run tests in
your code with `cargo test`.

### Extra tools

Two useful utilities are the `rustfmt` tool (for automatically
formatting your code) and `clippy` (for getting code advice). Note
that `clippy` is still a work in progress, and sometimes gives false
positives. To get them set up, run:

```
$ rustup component add clippy-preview rustfmt-preview
```

And then you can run them with:

```
$ cargo fmt
$ cargo clippy
```

### IDE

There is some IDE support for those who want it. I've heard great
things about IntelliJ IDEA's Rust add-on. Personally, I haven't used
it much yet, but I'm also not much of an IDE user in the first
place. This crash course won't assume any IDE, just basic text editor
support.

## Macros

Alright, we can finally look out our source code in `src/main.rs`:

```rust
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");
}
```

Simple enough. `fn` says we're writing a function. The name is
`main`. It takes no arguments, and has no return value. (Or, more
accurately, it returns the *unit type*, which is kind of like void in
C/C++, but really closer to the unit type in Haskell.) String literals
look pretty normal, and function calls look almost identical to other
C-style languages.

Alright, here's the first "crash course" part of this: why is there an
exclamation point after the `println`? I say "crash course" because
when I first learned Rust, I didn't see an explanation of this, and it
bothered me for a while.

`println` is _not_ a function. It's a macro. This is because it takes
a _format string_, which needs to be checked at compile time. To prove
the point, try changing the string literal to include `{}`. You'll get
an error message along the lines of:

```
error: 1 positional argument in format string, but no arguments were given
```

This can be fixed by providing an argument to fill into the
placeholder:

```rust
println!("Hello , world! {} {} {}", 5, true, "foobar");
```

Take a guess at what the output will be, and you'll probably be
right. But that leaves us with a question: how does the `println!`
macro know how to display these different types?

## Traits and Display

More crash course time! To get a better idea of how displaying works,
let's trigger a compile time error. To do this, we're going to define
a new data type called `Person`, create a value of that type, and try
to print it:

```rust
struct Person {
    name: String,
    age: u32,
}

fn main() {
    let alice = Person {
        name: String::from("Alice"),
        age: 30,
    };
    println!("Person: {}", alice);
}
```

We'll get into more examples on defining your own `struct`s and
`enum`s later, but you can [cheat and read the Rust
book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/2018-edition/ch05-00-structs.html)
if you're curious.

If you try to compile that, you'll get:

```
error[E0277]: `Person` doesn't implement `std::fmt::Display`
  --> src/main.rs:11:28
   |
11 |     println!("Person: {}", alice);
   |                            ^^^^^ `Person` cannot be formatted with the default formatter
   |
   = help: the trait `std::fmt::Display` is not implemented for `Person`
   = note: in format strings you may be able to use `{:?}` (or {:#?} for pretty-print) instead
   = note: required by `std::fmt::Display::fmt`
```

That's a bit verbose, but the important bit is ``the trait
`std::fmt::Display` is not implemented for `Person` ``. In Rust, a
_trait_ is similar to an interface in Java, or even better like a
typeclass in Haskell. (Noticing a pattern of things being similar to
Haskell concepts? Yeah, I did too.)

We'll get to all of the fun of defining our own traits, and learning
about implementing them later. But we're crashing forward right
now. So let's throw in an implementation of the trait right here:

```rust
impl Display for Person {
}
```

That didn't work:

```
error[E0405]: cannot find trait `Display` in this scope
 --> src/main.rs:6:6
  |
6 | impl Display for Person {
  |      ^^^^^^^ not found in this scope
help: possible candidates are found in other modules, you can import them into scope
  |
1 | use core::fmt::Display;
  |
1 | use std::fmt::Display;
  |

error: aborting due to previous error

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0405`.
error: Could not compile `foo`.
```

We haven't imported `Display` into the local namespace. The compiler
helpfully recommends two different traits that we may want, and tells
us that we can use the `use` statement to import them into the local
namespace. We saw in an earlier error message that we wanted
`std::fmt::Display`, so adding `use std::fmt::Display;` to the top of
`src/main.rs` will fix this error message. But just to prove the
point, no `use` statement is necessary! We can instead us:

```rust
impl std::fmt::Display for Person {
}
```

Awesome, our previous error message has been replaced with something
else:

```
error[E0046]: not all trait items implemented, missing: `fmt`
 --> src/main.rs:6:1
  |
6 | impl std::fmt::Display for Person {
  | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ missing `fmt` in implementation
  |
  = note: `fmt` from trait: `fn(&Self, &mut std::fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> std::result::Result<(), std::fmt::Error>`
```

We're quickly approaching the limit of things we're going to cover in
a "kicking the tires" lesson. But hopefully this will help us plant
some seeds for next time.

The error message is telling us that we need to include a `fmt` method
in our implementation of the `Display` trait. It's also telling us
what the type signature of this is going to be. Let's look at that
signature, or at least what the error message says:

```
fn(&Self, &mut std::fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> std::result::Result<(), std::fmt::Error>
```

There's a lot to unpack there. I'm going to apply terminology to each
bit, but you shouldn't expect to fully grok this yet.

* `Self` is the type of the thing getting the implementation. In this
  case, that's `Person`.
* Adding the `&` at the beginning makes it a _reference_ to the value,
  not the value itself. C++ developers are used to that concept
  already. Many other languages talk about pass by reference too. In
  Rust, this plays in quite a bit with _ownership_. Ownership is a
  massively important topic in Rust, and we're not going to discuss it
  more now.
* `&mut` is a _mutable reference_. By default, everything in Rust is
  immutable, and you have to explicitly say that things are
  mutable. We'll later get into why mutability of references is
  important to ownership in Rust.
* Anyway, the second argument is a mutable reference to a
  `Formatter`. What's the `<'_>` thing after `Formatter`? That's a
  _lifetime parameter_. That _also_ has to do with ownership. We'll
  get to lifetimes later as well.
* The `->` indicates that we're providing the return type of the
  function.
* `Result` is an `enum`, which is a _sum type_, or a _tagged
  union_. It's generic on two _type parameters_: the value in case of
  success and the value in case of error.
* In the case of success, our function returns a `()`, or unit
  value. This is another way of saying "I don't return any useful
  value if things go well." In the case of an error, we return
  `std::fmt::Error`.
* Rust has no runtime exceptions. Instead, when something goes wrong,
  you return it explicitly. Almost all code uses the `Result` type to
  track things going wrong. This is more explicit than exception-based
  languages. But unlike languages like C, where it's easy to forget to
  check the type of a return to see if it succeeded, or tedious to do
  error handling properly, Rust makes this much less painful. We'll
  deal with it later.
    * __NOTE__ Rust _does_ have the concept of panics, which in practice behave similarly to runtime exceptions. However, there are two important differences. Firstly, by convention, code is not supposed to use the panic mechanism for signaling normal error conditions (like file not found), and instead reserve panics for completely unexpected failures (like logic errors). Secondly, panics are (mostly) unrecoverable, meaning they take down the current thread.

      A previous version of this document said that panics are unrecoverable, and that they take down the entire thread. However, as pointed out by [J Haigh](https://twitter.com/debugsteven), this isn't quite true: the function [`catch_unwind`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/panic/fn.catch_unwind.html) allows you to usually capture and recover from a panic without losing the current thread. I'm not going to go into more details here.

Awesome, that type signature all on its own gave us enough material
for about 5 more lessons! Don't worry, you'll be able to write some
Rust code without understanding all of those details, as we'll
demonstrate in the rest of this lesson. But if you're really
adventurous, feel free to explore the Rust book for more information.

## Semicolons

Let's get back to our code, and actually implement our `fmt` method:

```rust
struct Person {
    name: String,
    age: u32,
}

impl std::fmt::Display for Person {
    fn fmt(&self, fmt: &mut std::fmt::Formatter) -> Result<(), std::fmt::Error> {
        write!(fmt, "{} ({} years old)", self.name, self.age)
    }
}

fn main() {
    let alice = Person {
        name: String::from("Alice"),
        age: 30,
    };
    println!("Person: {}", alice);
}
```

We're using the `write!` macro now, to write content into the
`Formatter` provided to our method. This is beyond the scope of our
discussion, but this allows for more efficient construction of values
and production of I/O than producing a bunch of intermediate
strings. Yay efficiency.

The `&self` parameter of the method is a special way of saying "this
is a method that works on this object." This is quite similar to how
you'd write code in Python, though in Rust you have to deal with pass
by value vs pass by reference.

The second parameter is named `fmt`, and `&mut Formatter` is its type.

The very observant among you may have noticed that, above, the error
message mentioned `&Self`. In our implementation, however, we made a
lower `&self`. The difference is that `&Self` refers to the _type_ of
the value, and the lower case `&self` is the value itself. In fact,
the `&self` parameter syntax is basically sugar for `self: &Self`.

Does anyone notice something missing? You may think I made a
typo. Where's the semicolon at the end of the `write!` call? Well,
first of all, copy that code in and run it to prove to yourself that
it's _not_ a typo, and that code works. Now add the semicolon and try
compiling again. You'll get something like:

```
error[E0308]: mismatched types
 --> src/main.rs:7:81
  |
7 |       fn fmt(&self, fmt: &mut std::fmt::Formatter) -> Result<(), std::fmt::Error> {
  |  _________________________________________________________________________________^
8 | |         write!(fmt, "{} ({} years old)", self.name, self.age);
  | |                                                              - help: consider removing this semicolon
9 | |     }
  | |_____^ expected enum `std::result::Result`, found ()
  |
  = note: expected type `std::result::Result<(), std::fmt::Error>`
             found type `()`
```

This is potentially a huge confusion in Rust. Let me point out
something else that you may have noticed, especially if you come from
a C/C++/Java background: we have a return value from our method, but
we never used `return`!

The answer to that second concern is easy: the last value generated in
a function in Rust is taken as its return value. This is similar to
Ruby and&mdash;yet again&mdash;Haskell. `return` is only needed for
early termination.

But we're still left with our first question: why don't we need a
semicolon here, and why does adding the semicolon break our code?
Semicolons in Rust are used for terminating _statements_. A statement
is something like the `use` statement we saw before, or the `let`
statement we briefly demonstrated here. The value of a
statement is always unit, or `()`. That's why, when we add the
semicolon, the error message says ``found type `()` ``. Leaving off
the semicolon, the expression itself is the return value, which is
what we want.

You'll see the phrase that Rust is an _expression-oriented language_,
and this kind of thing is what it's referring to. You can [see mention
of this in the
FAQ](https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/faq.html#when-should-i-use-an-implicit-return). Personally,
I find that the usage of semicolon like this can be subtle, and I
still instinctively trip up on it occasionally when my C/C++/Java
habits kick in. But fortunately the compiler helps identify these
pretty quickly.

## Numeric types

Last concept before we just start dropping in some code. We're going
to start off by playing with numeric values. There's a really good
reason for this in Rust: they are _copy values_, values which the
compiler automatically clones for us. Keep in mind that a
big part of Rust is ownership, and tracking who owns what is
non-trivial. However, with the primitive numeric types, making copies
of the values is so cheap, the compiler will do it for you
automatically. This is some of that automatic magic I mentioned in my
intro post.

To demonstrate, let's check out some code that works fine with numeric
types:

```rust
fn main() {
    let val: i32 = 42;
    printer(val);
    printer(val);
}

fn printer(val: i32) {
    println!("The value is: {}", val);
}
```

We've used a _let statement_ to create a new variable, `val`. We've
explicitly stated that its type is `i32`, or a 32-bit signed
integer. Typically, these kinds of type annotations are not needed in
Rust, as it will usually be able to infer types. Try leaving off the
type annotation here. Anyway, we then call the function `printer` on
`val` twice. All good.

Now, let's use a `String` instead. A `String` is a heap-allocated
value which can be created from a string literal with
`String::from`. (Much more on the many string types later). It's
expensive to copy a `String`, so the compiler won't do it for us
automatically. Therefore, this code won't compile:

```rust
fn main() {
    let val: String = String::from("Hello, World!");
    printer(val);
    printer(val);
}

fn printer(val: String) {
    println!("The value is: {}", val);
}
```

You'll get this intimidating error message:

```
error[E0382]: use of moved value: `val`
 --> src/main.rs:4:13
  |
3 |     printer(val);
  |             --- value moved here
4 |     printer(val);
  |             ^^^ value used here after move
  |
  = note: move occurs because `val` has type `std::string::String`, which does not implement the `Copy` trait

error: aborting due to previous error
```

__Exercise 1__ there are two easy ways to fix this error message: one
using the `clone()` method of `String`, and one that changes `printer`
to take a reference to a `String`. Implement both
solutions. (Solutions will be posted separately in a few days.)

## Printing numbers

We're going to tie off this lesson with a demonstration of three
different ways of looping to print the numbers 1 to 10. I'll let
readers guess which is the most idiomatic approach.

### loop

`loop` creates an infinite loop.

```rust
fn main() {
    let i = 1;

    loop {
        println!("i == {}", i);
        if i >= 10 {
            break;
        } else {
            i += 1;
        }
    }
}
```

__Exercise 2__ This code doesn't quite work. Try to figure out why
without asking the compiler. If you can't find the problem, try to
compile it. Then fix the code.

If you're wondering: you could equivalently use `return` or `return
()` to exit the loop, since the end of the loop is also the end of the
function.

### while

This is similar to C-style while loops: it takes a condition to check.

```rust
fn main() {
    let i = 1;

    while i <= 10 {
        println!("i == {}", i);
        i += 1;
    }
}
```

This has the same bug as the previous example.

### for loops

For loops let you perform some action for each value in a
collection. The collections are generated lazily using iterators, a
great concept built right into the language in Rust. Iterators are
somewhat similar to generators in Python.

```rust
fn main() {
    for i in 1..11 {
        println!("i == {}", i);
    }
}
```

## Exercise 3: Extra semicolons

Can you leave out any semicolons in the examples above? Instead of
just slamming code into the compiler, try to think through when you
can and cannot drop the semicolons.

## Exercise 4: FizzBuzz

Implement fizzbuzz in Rust. The rules are:

* Print the numbers 1 to 100
* If the number is a multiple of 3, output fizz instead of the number
* If the number is a multiple of 5, output buzz instead of the number
* If the number is a multiple of 3 __and__ 5, output fizzbuzz instead of the number

## Next time

Next time, the plan is to get into more details on ownership, though
plans are quite malleable in this series. Stay tuned!

[Rust at FP Complete](https://www.fpcomplete.com/rust) | [Introduction](https://www.snoyman.com/blog/2018/10/introducing-rust-crash-course)
